# Massachusetts-Distributed-Energy-Study
Methodology for Data Collection and Processing
Remote Sensing and geospatial data was utilized in this study to create new insights into the Massachusetts energy market and ultimately quantify the viability of renewable distributed energy generation. All data utilized went through a structured pipeline to ensure quality control. The first step was a basic visual inspection that was conducted via QGIS 3.14. After  a visual inspection all further processing was conducted with python programming in the jupyter notebook. The data processing first involved isolating the values to just the state of Massachusetts as much of the information provided was an aggregate of the entire United States. Second, all datasets were double checked for inconsistencies in specific values such as removing areas with null information, formatting correct data types, and adding appropriate indices for joining purposes. Also, data values for datasets such as power territory and transmission lines had to be almost entirely recalculated or revalued because of inconsistent record keeping such as calling the same power company two slightly different names or dealing with areas where two power companies operate in conjunction. Another large portion of data processing involved assigning unique geometries for mapping purposes as most of the datasets came without one. This was a crucial step to ensure the results being put forth about viability of towns to host distributed solar were being mapped and analyzed accurately. All steps for the data processing can be found at the github link cited below. 
Data provided by MassDGIC and MassGIS was utilized to generate general trends and insights into the power grid infrastructure state of Massachusetts. Due to the sensitive nature of power infrastructure data in Massachusetts an information request was provided to MassGIS to access these datasets which were provided. This data included transmission lines, power lines as well as the territory of each power company. The power territory data was aggregated by company name and towns that had a shared power company were given a special value to ensure consistency. Circuit saturation is a critical component to understand a towns ability to host new generation upgrades and the dataset was provided by MassDGIC. The saturation circuit data is an aggregation of all circuits at the town level and the average of each town's circuit saturation was calculated. As shown by the saturated circuit figure and legend, the closer the ratio is to 1 the more saturated the circuit is. Mapping this data shows a general pattern of circuits being more and more saturated as you move west away from Boston and the eastern portion of the state. In addition to saturation, circuit data provided by MassDGIC was utilized to understand the recent infrastructure developments in circuit capacity in Massachusetts. Two datasets and subsequently two maps were created that show first the total installed capacity of all circuits and also the total installed capacity of installed circuits for hosting solar generation in Massachusetts between 2009 and 2020. This data was used to prove an overall growing trend in solar adoption in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
In addition, a large amount of data from Googles (Project Sunroof) was processed and analyzed to understand the capacity of Massachusetts to utilize solar energy.  Project Sunroof is an initiative by Google to provide open-source data in regards to the viability of a building's roof to host solar energy generation. Sunlight exposure data was collected via satellite LiDAR acquisition. Of note, is that this data is extremely accurate in regards to how it calculates the total irradiance hitting a buildings roof and thus providing a very accurate estimate of the amount of energy that can be generated with solar panels. To determine irradiance, angle of the roof (facing east,south,west,north), roof square feet, shade from adjacent buildings, and exposure to irradiance throughout the year (i.e Difference in Winter and Summer irradiance exposure) were all factors. Ultimately, a column in the dataset, percent qualification, was calculated based on the amount of buildings in a town that could host solar generation. On relating sunlight exposure to actual potential harnessable energy, it was assumed that each roof if it were to adopt solar panels would have an efficiency of 250 watts per panel. This data was processed at the town level and then joined with geometry data for georeferencing and mapping purposes. Due to challenges with data availability and acquisition only 64% of all land area in Massachusetts was captured. This is concerning but the areas that are covered contain a majority of the development and population in the state. Of the 64% of Massachusetts, 75% of buildings were deemed to be economically and technically viable to produce solar power in at least some meaningful capacity. In addition to sunlight exposure, other data from Project Sunroof was utilized. This included pre-existing solar installations to show trends in towns adoption of solar energy. A carbon emissions column of this dataset was mapped providing insight into how much carbon emissions could be avoided through solar adoption. 
Lastly, since the Greater Boston Area is a domineering socio-economical-political geographic area in Massachusetts, maps were also provided that exempted this area. This was done to provide a more “matched” and equal estimate of each town's performance in regards to adopting distributed energy. The assumption that this exemption is providing is to understand the Massachusetts energy grid at the town level and not have numbers misconstrued from the very large metropolitan area of Boston which is not representative of the rest of Massachusetts. 
